Alright guys. Positional control from the side mount. We're gonna talk about some solo preparation drills; some basic concepts that will help us for today's lesson. So, let's start from here. I want you guys to start with this concept of putting your hip on the ground and posting your foot up. Okay? So, my right pelvis is on the ground. My left foot is posted. Not like this. My actual foot, the sole of my foot, is on the mat, and my forearms are on the mat here as well. Your hands just can be connected. It doesn't matter how they're connected. So, hip down, foot up. Now what I want you to do is roll your hips so So, hip down, foot up. Now what I want you to do is roll your hips so your other hip goes to the ground and your other foot goes up. So, we're just gonna switch from side to side, rolling. And if you feel a little too much tension in your back doing it on your elbows, you can even lay on your stomach, and go boom. Look at my forearms and my chest on the ground now. So, my foot goes up, I roll, foot. Roll, foot. Roll, boom. Roll, boom. Couple more. Roll, boom. Boom, boom. From your elbows now. Roll, boom. Boom. Excellent. Now go to your knees, and from your now. Roll, boom. Boom. Excellent. Now go to your knees, and from your knees, here's what we wanna see. Post your foot up and bring your back leg straight through. Okay? So, you maintain a nice wide base, one elbow on the ground, other elbow's off the ground. Now that leg that came through, we're gonna bring it back up to our knees and our both elbows. Now I post the other leg up, step this leg straight through. Boom. Okay? And then kick it back out, knees and elbows. Toes up, sit. Back out. Sit, Toes up, sit. Back out. Sit, back out. Sit, back out. Now we can try it by posting our foot, sitting through, and now when you go up, go to your toes. Toes, boom. So, instead of your knees touching, go to your toes. Toes, boom. Toes and forearms, step all the way through. A little bit faster. Boom, boom, boom, boom. Excellent. Boom. Boom. Last one. Up, out. Alright. You guys are ready. Boom. Last one. Up, out. Alright. You guys are ready. Positional control side mount coming up next. When we talk about positional control, it is the number one -- side mount. From a pure depletion perspective and from a pyramid and a balance perspective, side mount gives us the greatest control with the least amount of training -- right -- the most leverage, the greatest use of gravity. right -- the most leverage, the greatest use of gravity. Most efficient. Most efficient. And now listen. Don't get it twisted. There are things about the mount and there are things about back mount that we love. And guard. And they have their own advantages. But when it comes to like, listen, all you have to do is hold down this man or woman for one minute or two minutes, until the police arrive, this is the position that you're gonna use to accomplish that. Okay? Holding the person down. And if you don't accomplish that. Okay? Holding the person down. And if you don't know how to hold someone down with your body weight -- Let's just talk about -- It's pretty obvious. Yeah, it's pretty obvious. If you don't know how to do it. So, jump on the other side, Ryron. If Ryron was just some random person in a street fight and you took down this bank robber -- On your knees. Yeah. And you were gonna hold me, and you didn't have a plan on how to do it -- Hold me down. This is how it looks. It's like it's -- Right? It's very -- People are very hand focused. Yeah. Use your hands. Hold me down. It's very much like -- They might be punching, grabbing. This is how someone holds someone down who doesn't know jiu jitsu, because they think that holding is a function of hands. Hold hands; hand hold. holding is a function of hands. Hold hands; hand hold. They both start with H's. They have a lot to do with each other. So, everyone wants to use their hands to hold someone. No, no, no, no. You don't wanna use your hands at all. It's all about body position. So look at Ryron here. Pressure and balance, you guys. Pressure and balance. I feel that. You can hear it in my voice, you guys. He's parked the car on my chest. This is the side mount position and we're gonna talk about some, several, several elements today, starting with how to prevent the person from rolling you off. Then we're gonna talk about how to prevent them from putting you in the guard. Then we're gonna get into how to transition from putting you in the guard. Then we're gonna get into how to transition into the mount once we've depleted all their resources, physical and psychological. So, right now, Ryron, talk about your positioning. I try to spin; I try to roll. How long can I go hard like this for? I can tell you, I'm already kind of feeling it. Not that long. So, here's what's happening. I have one arm under his neck, one arm under his arm, my knee off the ground, and my back hip down. From here I go from holding to hands out. Holding to hands out. Whatever I need. If he moves in a circle, I move with him. He moves the other way, I move with him. Always knee off the ground. And I move with him. He moves the other way, I move with him. Always knee off the ground. And your weight's always on my chest I feel, like right now. My head is low and my weight is not on my elbows. It's on him -- on his chest. Through my chest. Okay. Now when we, when I go to hold, I hold, because he might want to bench press me. You might want to push me away. Go back. So, I want to stay connected. Push me away. He can't. Now, he also, in terms of rolling, really he's panicking. He's bridging in both directions. When he bridges this way, this leg right here -- a firm leg. Go ahead. Bridge. It's really strong. It's like he's bridging into a wall. Bridge again. Nothing. When he bridges the other way, my hand goes out. Okay? And similar to positional control from the mount, you can feel -- there's a certain, there's a there's an energy that goes one way, and then when he gives up, stops, and then he goes here next. Naturally, once you can't make it out one side, you change directions and try your luck the other way. Now, when Rener moves in a circle, I need to move with him. If he moves and I don't move, then my leg right here is no longer posted at the angle that I If he moves and I don't move, then my leg right here is no longer posted at the angle that I need to stop from being rolled. So, keeping good chest pressure and being light on my toes allows me to follow him when he moves. Well, and that's what you have to understand, is that the Pyramid Principle -- In this case we're using the Pyramid Principle. Right? Ryron's keeping well distributed base points. One on my body, one down south, and one up here where my rolling power is the greatest. The Pyramid Principle is not an absolute application of positioning. It's a relative positioning consideration. So, relative to my body, It's a relative positioning consideration. So, relative to my body, Ryron's foot must change to always be optimally positioned for his optimal balance. Right? So, from here, like Ryron said, if I walk towards him and his foot stays, his foot is no longer positioned in the direction where I have the most power. Now, where do I have the most power? This is my bridging leg, which means my power is going to be opposite of that leg. And that's why that has to float. And he's here. Some people will put their knees on the ground. And it's okay momentarily, but you don't want to hang out with your knees on the ground for too long, because now his base point went from substantially wide and foot sticky on ground for too long, because now his base point went from substantially wide and foot sticky on the mat to knee down. This is his new base point right here. And not that that's a bad thing, but a very big bridge from a much larger opponent might cause -- Against us, since he's very long and I'm long, he's not gonna have a problem. But against someone much shorter, against the person on the bottom, much bigger -- bigger body and longer limbs -- this knee might not be wide enough of a base point. So, as a default in practice, we want you guys to get comfortable putting this leg up and keeping it there while all the weight is riding on my chest. His south hip is not touching the ground. In the warm up preparation drills today, His south hip is not touching the ground. In the warm up preparation drills today, we had our hips on the ground, but his hip is very much glued to my -- near my hip area. So, it's down. It's not up. It's not on your hip. Correct, correct. That would give him no discomfort. Instead it's, it's low near his hip, almost on like his diaphragm. My floating rib is getting it right there, you guys. And this is something you can only find the proper positioning if you communicate with your partner and you ask them, if I go like this, how does my weight feel? Too high. Too high. How does it feel? Too low and too centered. How does it feel? Too low and too south. centered. How does it feel? Too low and too south. How does it feel? Pretty annoying. I can't breathe, dude. So, with practice you will find that sweet spot and where to put your weight. And I mentioned it -- your elbows. Sometimes we lock hands and our elbows -- We're holding so tight with our arms that we create these frames with our arms, and we lock hands. And all the weight's here. All my weight's on this elbow and this elbow. I feel nothing. Oh, now I feel everything. Remember, Rener mentioned, it's not about hands. It's about weight. And when you're human you want to use your hands to hold. You wanna hug tight -- which sometimes that can work against us. want to use your hands to hold. You wanna hug tight -- which sometimes that can work against us. If I'm too locked on, I'm too tense, I'm potentially rollable. So, my hands are kinda -- Go ahead. Roll me. My hands are light but at the same time they're ready to hold. The connection between Ryron's hands is in direct, kind of, correlation to the push potential of my hands. So, if my hands are behind Ryron, there's not a lot of push potential, cause I'm not in front of him. So his hands can be more liberal, a little more disconnected, a little more floaty and ready for quick, crazy rolls. The minute my hands start to retract, he starts to get tighter. And when he locks, minute my hands start to retract, he starts to get tighter. And when he locks, notice the neck hugging arm is on top of the grip right there. It's not make it or break it, but there is a reason. Because -- go back -- he can take his hand -- Go out and back really fast. See how he can go so fast there and back? Go again. And without ever compromising the squeeze on my neck. Versus if you switch your hands, now in order to go out and back, you have to keep this hand open into the ground, so when you reach out it's not as huggy on my neck. So, the neck hugging arm should always be the one with the palm facing away from Ryron's face. So, he's here. His head is tight. His leg's out. His base is very solid. I feel all the weight on my rib cage. His base is very solid. I feel all the weight on my rib cage. If I don't feel that weight -- Now, just to be clear, I said, I can't breathe before. I can still breathe. But it's almost like I'm operating on like a percentage of my lung capacity. So, it's good enough for me, but for the average person right here, it's gonna, just gonna cause them to deplete psychologically sooner, because they feel a little sense of suffocation. Yeah. It feels like -- even though he can breathe -- you feel like, like a little bit restricted in your lung capacity. Yes. That's very discouraging. And remember, you're not -- Also, you're not fighting for your life. There you go. Let's talk about, let's talk about that one There you go. Let's talk about, let's talk about that one X variable, X factor here, which is Ryron is in side control. We're here. If at some point throughout all this amazing control. I'm successful at bringing this arm in front of his neck. Either to push on his neck or to just kind of come over and try to just kind of get up and go do something with it. Watch what Ryron can do. One, I can clear it. He can clear it. If he clears it, now you can go back to locking his hands, or -- Keeping my head low, and then he's gonna bring his arm around. Now we're back to here. There you go. So, if his hand sticks in front, you simply don't want that frame across your throat. So, look how he clears it. He alleviates pressure -- I lift my head a little bit as I -- boom -- push it So, look how he clears it. He alleviates pressure -- I lift my head a little bit as I -- boom -- push it across. Drop my head down. And now my arm has very little threat to his positioning. However -- When he comes back around now -- Frame my neck again. He doesn't let me. He shouldn't be able to frame. But we make mistakes. We look up, and my neck is exposed. Another option is this. Watch. Hand, hips, hand. And now we're in modified side mount right here. Okay? Let me try that. So, Ryron's down. Hand, hips, hand, you guys. So, check this out. It's called modified side mount. We want to include this here as a variable in your side mount control. So, we'll check our roll prevention for 15, 20 your side mount control. So, we'll check our roll prevention for 15, 20 seconds. And after all of our angles and our pyramid movement is checked, then we want to talk about the frame. So, his hand sneaks in. When it does -- Step one. As soon as this comes in, I don't want to stay here cause I'm gonna be getting choked. Look. Hand over the head. Elbow trap the neck. My hips, which are currently north facing, are gonna roll. And now they're south facing. And my south foot is the one that is now posted for base. Look. Okay. And my north hip is a little lower to the mat. base. Look. Okay. And my north hip is a little lower to the mat. And this hand is gonna come across and we're gonna block the inside hip with our forearm by placing your hand right here underneath their hips and hamstring. So, my -- I'm not doing this. I'm not doing this. My hand is underneath his hips, or like, now being near his feet. And my forearm is kind of checking his hip right here. My head is down. If my head is up, there's a slight risk of getting kneed in the face right here. So, by having my head down, even if he knees me, it's his thigh, not his knee, that makes contact. And I'll stay here. Ryron can bump. Now watch my base. I can grab onto his body. I can hold his armpit. I can hug his back if he bridges really high. I can hold his armpit. I can hug his back if he bridges really high. Bridge up again. Look. I can hug his back even. I'll come back out. He's walking in a circle. Look. My base is wide, but my shoulders and hips are slightly south facing. Why? Because by facing south, this frame is no longer such an impediment. But when this hand comes around my neck, now I'm facing into the arm. It's a little bit annoying on my neck. That's my indicator to -- look -- come right back. Hand. Roll the hips. Hips. And then hand back to neck hug. So, there is an aspect of this drill which is back to neck hug. So, there is an aspect of this drill which is just flowing back and forth. Bring the frame again. Hand, hips, hand. He hugs the neck. Hand, hips, hands. Frame. Elbow, roll those hips, block the hip. Chill here. When do I go back? Only when this hand comes to the south. And once in a -- When you switch back -- Go ahead. Switch back. Underhook, roll. Make it a habit to keep your head low and not allowing it. And then go ahead and pick it up for the drill, and allow it one more time. Boom. Yes. Let's rotate, please. I want to show how my legs are not switching completely. I want to show how my legs are not switching completely. So, from here you guys. Starting in this position. You're not sitting through. Yeah, he's framing my neck. Let's say he sneaks that frame in. Look. When I bring my elbow over the head to trap his head, I'm not doing this. Not that it's wrong -- because there are methods of mounting from there -- but that's not the purpose right now. The purpose is roll prevention. And I'm not roll preventing in that position because I'm sitting my hips and I'm compromising my pyramid. So, from here. Instead, when we go from here, north facing and he frames my neck -- Look. Elbow. All I'm doing is taking the north foot that is Elbow. All I'm doing is taking the north foot that is posted, I'm rolling my pelvis to the mat, and I'm letting my south foot be the one that is posted as I then take this hand and do my backstroke, and I wedge his hip, and my head stays low. Chest is still on him, carrying all the weight still. And what's also happening is you're kind of dropping your hip on my arm right here. You're dropping your hip on my shoulder. It's very uncomfortable. My shoulder's very stressed out. Move to your right a little more. See. Move a little more to your right. Now, not only do you have less of a base point, a kickstand, but my arm is more free to potentially start pushing you. So, Rener moving kickstand, but my arm is more free to potentially start pushing you. So, Rener moving up at an angle, my arm is now out of the equation. And I have better base in that north. Bridge up high. Look at that. Nice. My toes are there. Active toes. Active foot. When he goes to hug my neck -- rotate, rotate, rotate -- I'm following him, following him. So, they might hug your neck but they also might not move their arm around. You can push my wrist around your head. Push it around. There you go. Then we switch back, and get right back to here. Okay? So, this is the drill, you guys. Let's start from here. Let's be very clear. He has better control from here. Let's be very clear. He has better control from here. If you have to choose where to start -- It's here. He will start from here. He makes a mistake. His head lifts up. I frame his neck. He does the switch to modified side mount. My arm doesn't move. He pushes my arm. He slips his head on the inside. I'd rather be here. And goes back to standard. Okay? I'd rather be here. But if he brings the frame in, the reason why we can't stay here, because if I insist against his frame, I'm facing a frame. And when you face a structural, you know, a structural bone structure, that's still annoying on my neck. Ryron can start pushing away, scooting away, making space and getting out. Ryron can start pushing away, scooting away, making space and getting out. So, by letting that frame be directly in my throat -- and it gives Ryron a certain leverage over my upper body that I don't want him to have. So, that's why we're rolling off and we're changing our relative body position right away so that -- to defeat that frame, of course, provided we couldn't slip past it and trap it with our head, like Ryron showed. So, now we're here in modified side mount, modified side -- until he comes around or until we create that. Then we roll right back and we're here. So, to start this drill, you guys, we'll start from our knees. Okay? Ryron's down. The subject will come in. If I'm the one practicing I'm on my knees off to his side. I'm going to enter into with an underhook on his arm and a cross face, which is also known as I'm going to enter into with an underhook on his arm and a cross face, which is also known as like a neck hug. So, I'll come in with an opposite side underhook. Very important. Most common mistake: People come in with this underhook and this neck hug, and now they do this, and now Ryron can slip out the back as he turns. He can duck right out. That's a headlock. We don't want that. Opposite side of our body is where we must have that underhook. Okay? That outside arm control. I come in here from my knees. My chest goes to his. I get my underhook. I get my neck hug, and I lock my hands. Neck hugging hand is palm down. And now I'm gonna sprawl my legs out, get that hip in the right position, right on his -- get that hip in the right position, right on his -- I'm laying my chest and my stomach right on his floating rib and my head is low. I'm in great position. When Ryron bridges towards me, see how I'm moving in circle? Pyramid principle, you guys. Fully alive and well right here. Nice, strong pyramid relative to his position. As he moves, so do we. And then, of course, Depletion Principle 101. The whole point of this first slice is just to burn their spirit. Right? In life or in practice. He's gonna bridge. He's gonna turn. I'm gonna use my hands, my hips, my foot positioning. He's gonna get exhausted, physically and psychologically. He's gonna get exhausted, physically and psychologically. And then we may advance to mount in future slices in the fight or in practice here. So, depletion is the name of the game right now. Control so that he doesn't want to be here anymore. And that is exacerbated by the fact that I'm laying on his ribs. When Ryron goes to bridge me in either direction, technically, my mindset is this: Keep his shoulder blades on the ground. That's what I'm thinking. So, as ryron bridges up into me, for example -- Go ahead. Big bridge. See how his shoulders are off the ground? I'm being very soft with my leg, my torso -- It's very like -- I'm not very resistant here. When he bridges up like that. Go ahead. Turn. Big bridge. When he bridges up like that. Go ahead. Turn. Big bridge. My mindset is push him off my feet. Drive his shoulders back to the ground. So, it's a very stiff, well posted leg that's making that possible. When he rolls me the other way, if I'm kind of soft over here -- Look at his shoulders. Stay, keep rolling. Look at his shoulders. No! Push off and get my -- Go. Do it again now. Look. I don't let his shoulders leave the mat. I drive. I'm preempting his shoulder so he's always flat. The flatter his shoulders, the flatter his spirit. And one thing is when you do put your hand out on the front side -- go ahead -- the wider this goes, the bigger risk that you lose this go ahead -- the wider this goes, the bigger risk that you lose this arm. So when Ryron rolls me to the front side, there's always an awareness of his humerus bone, and the structure of my arm to prevent his elbow from slipping on the inside right here. And general, general, general body positioning. If Rener is holding tight and he's like two inches over me a little. Yes. There. He's a lot more tippable. And he's really gonna need his hand. So, oftentimes, melting back a little bit more, especially against somebody much heavier on the bottom, having your hips a little lower will make a huge difference in keep me from being able to having your hips a little lower will make a huge difference in keep me from being able to throw him over the top. Go ahead. Now, does Rener always have to put his hand out? No. Sometimes, like he, for example, him and I -- I can't roll him right now, simply because of his positioning. Now, obviously you could be too low. So find that sweet spot and learn that your positioning, that's probably -- I'd say 95% of your control from being thrown that way is where you are, and maybe 5% lies on the hand going out. Yeah, I don't even -- I didn't need my hand. Ryron makes some great points here. By sliding two inches back towards your base points, you're so much less rollable, just based on the nature and physics and -- right -- you're so much less rollable, just based on the nature and physics and -- right -- leverage that he has there. Especially -- we're similar size. That's exactly right. And if we're side mounted on someone who's 100 pounds heavier than either one of us, we're not very top heavy center. We're always kind of melting our way to the back side, because if Ryron's gonna roll me anywhere, where is he gonna roll me? Look. Look at -- this is a canoe. This is the outrigger on a canoe. The legs are over here. What are the odds that the canoe flips in this direction? Very little. I'm gonna bridge that way. He's gonna try. But what are the odds that the canoe flips in that direction? Greater. But still not that great, particularly if you have a very heavy outrigger on the canoe. Greater. But still not that great, particularly if you have a very heavy outrigger on the canoe. If the legs are out in my body is low, when he don't roll that way, there's no way. But we don't wanna be too low. So, we want to find that sweet spot. But if we're too high, by a few inches, now I might not have time to roll my hand, especially if they're tight, because they get stuck in here. And if we get side-- if we side mount somebody 100 pounds heavier, we will be low and our hand will be light. We'll kind of be default here. We will be ready. Yeah. Because someone can pick you up. There could be 100 pounds heavier. They can grab you by your hip and lift everything. They can grab you by your hip and lift everything. So, this hand will be necessary. Yeah, so then -- Yeah, that's a good point. Alright, you guys. This is called roll prevention. Slice one positional control from side mount. And, um, we're gonna do it. We're gonna start with some circular motion. We're gonna start with some control, some squeeze, head positioning and nice wide pyramid structures. Our mindset is depletion. The bottom person's gonna check our base in every direction. They're gonna give us some feedback on, hey, ribs a little lower. Nice. Little higher. Right, right there. You're too low. Adjust. Good. Put your hand out, but not so wide because I can slip under. Feedback. After we Adjust. Good. Put your hand out, but not so wide because I can slip under. Feedback. After we check the roll prevention with the standard configuration -- right -- standard underhook and cross face -- the upper body control, then the bottom person will bring that frame across the neck. At that point -- Try the little push. Push it once. And then, and then when it comes around and they do it again, then you arm over the head -- Modified side mount. Elbow traps their head right in the crook of their neck. Trap their head and your hips will do that slight rotation. Hips. Then that big backstroke, (Ryron: Hand.) blocking the inside hip. From there you stay for a little while. Stay for a little while. Control. Get your legs out. Feel comfortable preventing rolls from that modified side mount. Get your legs out. Feel comfortable preventing rolls from that modified side mount. They're gonna bridge, twist and go. Once they go, man, I can't, and then their hand sneaks back around your neck, that's your indicator to come back in for the underhook. Or, like Ryron said, you can slip it on your own. Right? But let's just be comfortable where we are. And then once we get back to our cross face underhook, at that point we settle in, we hold, and then we switch roles after that. Okay? So, we'll control, switch to modified, come back to standard, control a little bit more, and then switch roles, top to bottom. This is the one, you guys. You're gonna feel it. It's gonna suck to be on the bottom. But, you know, it's gonna suck for your partner, as well. Both of you guys, top and bottom, as you alternate. Both of you guys, top and bottom, as you alternate. So, one for one. Have fun, you guys. Here we go. If you land in the side mount position in a street fight against someone bigger than you, the biggest threat -- 99% of the threat -- is them rolling you, which we addressed in slice one, roll prevention. Pyramid and depletion, modifying your positioning based on their hand configuration. modifying your positioning based on their hand configuration. Keep them on their back -- shoulders on the mat. That's the 99% of it. There is a 1%. There is. So, Ryron is down. The 1% is this. You're here. And after all this nice wide base, and roll prevention, and control, and perfect rib positioning, and depletion, and he's exhausted, the bottom person may, may turn and slide your bottom knee under your body. Okay. Now, there -- Is there a presumption here of some knowledge? Is there a presumption that they Now, there -- Is there a presumption here of some knowledge? Is there a presumption that they know the benefit of bringing this knee in? Maybe. In jiu jitsu, when you're training against people who understand, this is probably the first thing they're gonna do. It's the 99% of what they're gonna do. And the 1% is rolling you wildly. So, it's the inverse of what you might experience in the fight against someone who does not know jiu jitsu. But it's so common that we just need to discuss what to do if someone starts pushing your hips with the objective of sliding their bottom knee under your body to then potentially recover the guard. So, as he turns, his knee slides in and he squares up, and now his legs are around my body, his knee slides in and he squares up, and now his legs are around my body, and I've lost my position of advantage there, now inside his guard, which is not ideal. It's not the end of the world, but it's not ideal. And it can also be someone who's just very active with this bottom arm. Yeah. They might not really know about guard, but they're just pushing this hip a lot, stiff arming your hip. Yeah. So, when that happens, we have to know what to do. So, he's pushing here. Check it out. Boom. And then we're here, we're here, we're here. And then, eventually, he starts twisting and rolling and going, I might switch back. Once he shows me that his intention is to roll once rolling and going, I might switch back. Once he shows me that his intention is to roll once again, I'll switch back to roll prevention mindset. Which means what? Back to my nice pyramid positioning, my nice structure. Okay? So, from here, I'm holding on nice and tight. As soon as I feel Ryron's hand or forearm pushing my hip, look what we're gonna do. We're gonna scoop the elbow, switch the legs, control the body. Nice wide base. Staying right here. And then go back when I need to. I start to feel my base get compromised, I'll go back to roll prevention. Control, control. I'll go back to roll prevention. Control, control. Once again, his forearm hits my hip. Look. What I'm gonna do is take my inside hand, scoop the tricep. Okay? Open hand right there above the elbow. And as I peel it off my hip, I'm also gonna roll my hips so that Ryron doesn't have that surface area to push on. It's like whoop, and we're switching our hips. The forearm is probably more common. Forearm is more common cause I'm usually gonna be a little closer here. Yeah. Right here, forearm pushing. Unless I'm way down here. Then it might be hand. So, in either case, my leg stays posted. Okay? The base leg stays in position. So, in either case, my leg stays posted. Okay? The base leg stays in position. The inside hand scoops the tricep. And the back leg is gonna shoot straight under his arm, almost in the same plane as his spine -- like parallel to his spine. I don't wanna be like here. Okay? I'm really here. Wide base. And my other leg is propped out. It was higher, and after the switch it goes even further out for base, because it's compensating for the fact that my other leg is no longer there. When you get here, there's a tendency to want to sit up. Don't do that. The higher you sit, the more freedom this Don't do that. The higher you sit, the more freedom this hand's gonna have, and possibly the more chance that you get rolled this way. So, after you sit through -- So, from here, he pushes my hip, I scoop the elbow, and I switch my legs. My head and my body stay driving forward. And my weight's on his rib cage now, not on the ground. Same concept as roll prevention. My elbow right now is bearing weight. So are my hips. We don't want that. Watch what I do. My elbow and my hips come off the ground. Count to 3. 1, 2, 3. Okay? So, my elbow in here -- off the ground. And you can't see it, Okay? So, my elbow in here -- off the ground. And you can't see it, but he can feel it. They come off the ground like this much. They just alleviate pressure on the ground, and I transfer it into his rib cage here so that he's carrying the weight. Gravity is free. Okay? But you have to know what to do with it. If you carry it on your own limbs, he's not paying for it. So, I transfer that. And I keep my head low. Okay? So, I'm holding Ryron's shoulder on the backside here -- little shoulder hook -- and I'm dragging my head low to minimize the chance that his hand over there becomes an annoyance. Now when I move a little bit in a circle, notice how his back leg also moves. He's preserving that angle, that back, that back post, He's preserving that angle, that back, that back post, similar to roll prevention. Yeah, we talked about it, you guys. We still need to have this same principles of balance that we talked about in slice one. But there are some new principles of emphasis here. Detachment Principle and Prevention are ones we want to emphasize. Detachment Principle is this. I'm here. Ryron's working on my hips. He's pushing my hips away. I can hold on for dear life and then be subjected to his technique. Or I'm holding on here, he starts to work, I go, no, and let everything go. You have to know when to detach, when to disconnect from your control of the opponent or You have to know when to detach, when to disconnect from your control of the opponent or your connection to the opponent in order to favor your next move. And in this case, we're detaching, we're rolling our hips, and that release creates a position of advantage that now -- Because my leg is on the ground essentially near the ground and north facing, there's no space for Ryron's knee to come in. Ryron's knee comes in now. That's how he gets in. Right? The reason why this move works is as he pushes my hips -- Look. As I scoop, where is his leg supposed to go? He has no more pusher, and he has no space to insert his bottom leg. So, detaching is what made that possible. And then the Prevention Principle, So, detaching is what made that possible. And then the Prevention Principle, how my goal at any given time right now not to advance upon Ryron and do my own thing. It's clear that my goal in this whole equation -- it's true for slice one as well -- my goal is: Prevent Ryron from accomplishing his objectives. And, too often, people -- right -- kind of make their success contingent on achieving their own objectives, versus preventing the opponent's objectives. And I think that side mount control is very much, you know, a very strong representation of that principle, because it's clear that my priority is his a very strong representation of that principle, because it's clear that my priority is his priorities. And if Ryron wants to put me in the guard, I want to stop him. If he wants to roll me, I'm going to stop him. So, Prevention Principle 101. And that was seen also how he went from standard to modified. The fact that the side mount is so dynamic; we change from one to the other. There's no fixed position of holding. It's only addressing your escape ambitions. Correct. And even right now, when I push your hip, for example, and you sit through. If from here, I happen to make a frame -- His head should be low. But if I frame he goes -- boom. Modified side mount. Boom. He hugs my neck. Arm comes around. He goes back. Then we go here. Standard. Boom. Check his base. Roll, roll. Boom. And then let's say he goes back to rolling Then we go here. Standard. Boom. Check his base. Roll, roll. Boom. And then let's say he goes back to rolling from here. I'll go back to here. Let's say he goes back to guard. Back to guard. I'll sit through. Okay. He goes back to frame. My elbow comes over. I'll switch. Trap the head, roll the hips, put it up. Hugs my neck. I'll come back. Control. He goes to guard. Hold tight. Scoop the elbow. Sit through. Head down. He goes to roll -- boom. You choose. Boom. Back to base. Back to roll prevention. Back to circling. He frames from here. Boom. Roll. Block. He goes back to hug. here. Boom. Roll. Block. He goes back to hug. Boom, boom. So, one thing that is very important to understand, to feel, is when you do that cross chest position, when we sit through -- He goes through my hip. Go ahead. My head is low. Push my hip. I grab it. I sit through. Rener mentioned how the leg is back, the weight is forward. I actually love the idea of you guys not doing that -- of you dropping your hips to the ground. You can still keep your head low a little bit, but let his foot be kind of here. So, now he can walk his feet away, like 8, 10 inches -- a foot or so. So, now he can walk his feet away, like 8, 10 inches -- a foot or so. Now he swings and he off balances me. It's nice for you to feel how off balance you are if your back leg is not positioned correctly. So, once again, he pushes my hip, and I sit through to the cross chest. My leg is back, and then my weight is forward. Go ahead. Sit up. No way. Move your legs away. Can't. Boom. Can't. And then let's say I frame. He frames. Slow. Elbow. Trap the head. Roll the hips. Block the inside hip. Head down, looking towards the legs, but you're out of knees range. Excellent. He comes back. but you're out of knees range. Excellent. He comes back. Ryron goes back. He's back to here. I go to guard. Ryron scoops the elbow. Switch those hips. Get that weight on my rib cage. And then elbows are very light on the mat, and weight is all right here. One more small detail is this. When I'm on top of somebody, if I'm holding standard side control like this -- Bring your leg underneath kind of quickly. Look at that. There's so much space. So, having your hip low, it helps keep your weight low, but it also -- I have a small sensor, where if his knee comes through, not only do I feel his arm pushing my hip, but I also feel his knee touching my thigh. not only do I feel his arm pushing my hip, but I also feel his knee touching my thigh. So, it's one more thing telling me that he's trying to slip under to recover guard. So, having that hip reasonably low will help make that happen. So, from side mount, we're starting here. Wide base. The person pushes my hips. Look. I scoop their elbow, and we sit through. Okay. Detachment Principle right there. Wide base, hips off the ground, chest forward, hooking the shoulder, head down. From here, they move a little bit. The back foot follows. Follow. Adjust. If they circle that way. If they go this way, you circle Follow. Adjust. If they circle that way. If they go this way, you circle there. Always wide, wide, wide. Vertical. Head low, and driving forward. Hips off the ground. Now they're gonna roll you. Back to control. Back to your neck hug. Back to base. Follow. Follow. Follow. They go to guard again. Scoop the elbow, sit through, control, drive, head low, hold the shoulder. They frame your neck. Look. When the frame comes in this hand, as they're pushing your neck, comes all the way over, trap their head, roll those hips, block the hip. Follow. Follow. Follow. Follow. roll those hips, block the hip. Follow. Follow. Follow. Follow. Follow. Their frame is still here. The frame comes around my head. Underhook, roll the hips, lock them up. If they put you in the guard again. Scoop the elbow, switch those, legs drive forward. Follow. Freeze. They frame your neck. Just to be very clear, it's hand, hips, hand. So, which hand goes? The one that is light. The hand goes over the head. Go for it. This one is weight bearing. This one is not. Hand over the head. Now, when he switches his hips -- go ahead -- the weight transfers to that original hand. Now, when he switches his hips -- go ahead -- the weight transfers to that original hand. Now the other one is light. Now it's hand. When they bring the arm around your face the other way -- Boom -- you go back to light hand first. Hand. Roll the hips. And then light hand finishes. And now he's in standard side mount control. How interesting. How interesting. What a great facilitator of movement. Hand, hip, hands. And the hand that moves -- the light one -- is the one that is not bearing weight, or as much weight as the other hand. What a convenient convenience. Okay. So, let's practice, you guys. We're going guard prevention. Okay. So, let's practice, you guys. We're going guard prevention. We're roll -- So, there is some blending. These are compounding slices here. Right? So, there's roll prevention elements, but then we're transitioning. It's the transition that we're after. From standard side control there, they're pushing the hips, and you're switching your hips, sitting through, scooping the inside elbow, keeping your head and body weight forward, preventing their guard recovery. And then, once they kind of get burnt out, like 5, 7 seconds, where they can't put you in the guard, what are they gonna think? Go crazy. Do something else. And when they do something else, we adapt with them. Right? This is where all the depletion comes in. This is where the prevention mindset -- right -- ultimately that causes the depletion. This is where the prevention mindset -- right -- ultimately that causes the depletion. But that prevention mindset of, I don't want to do what I wanna do. I wanna do what is necessary to prevent the opponent from accomplishing their objective. That is my priority. Their priority is my priority. That's the, essentially, the basis of the Prevention Principle. Let's practice this. Let's have some fun. Once we're done, we're gonna go into how to transition into the mount. Transition from side mount into full mount. So, as we drill this right now, let's give it 15, 30 seconds each in control, adding all these elements of control, 15, 30 seconds each in control, adding all these elements of control, transitions, and back and forth. And then we'll talk about how to transition to mount once they're depleted in the next slice. 100 seconds has passed. Oh, my gosh. No less. Yeah, right. 100 seconds. Really? Yeah. Gosh, you're so aggressive. There's nowhere else to be. If you've controlled someone for 100 seconds, potentially, the fight is over. If you've controlled someone for 100 seconds, potentially, the fight is over. The fight is over. If you do 100 seconds, fight's over. I was trying to keep the fight going. Yeah, I know. Transition to mount. Go 30 seconds and let's have some more fun from the mount. In their practice, you said 15 to 30 seconds, and then the next slice. No. 100 seconds, 200 seconds. You can just be there forever. The fight is done. The fight is done, you guys. Side control. You don't have to go anywhere else, technically. Why are we gonna show them how to mount right now? Should we just leave? It's just good to have the option. Okay? In case you decide to advance, maybe you want Okay? In case you decide to advance, maybe you want to handcuff them. Interesting. Who knows? It might be easier to handcuff them from the mount. Well, that's the one thing we wanted to say. We talked about side mount as the dominant king of kings when it comes to control and depletion. This is the one. If I had to start anywhere in a fight and hold someone down until the cops got there, side mount will be at the top of the list. That being said, holding alone may not be the entirety of the objective. Like Ryron said, you might want to arrest the person if you're law enforcement. You might want to get them into a submission. And the thing is, is once you mount, your legs get get them into a submission. And the thing is, is once you mount, your legs get into the fight in a different way. They control the person's hips and body. And with your legs trapping their body, your hands are free of the control burden, so they can be used to advance and catch submissions or strikes, which we would never do, because we're not emotionally outraged people getting into street fights. But if it was a life or death situation, and you had to use your hands to submit someone, that's easier to do when you free your hands of the burden of holding onto the person, which is one of the burdens in side mount control, when you're perpendicular to their body. So, that being said, when we transition to mount, you're perpendicular to their body. So, that being said, when we transition to mount, you want to free your hands. Ryron's saying, wait 100 seconds, and I agree. 100 seconds is good to go. Now, obviously 100 seconds of keeping the person on their back is going to break their spirit. There will be no spirit left. So, oftentimes they'll just say, okay, I give up. I'm good to go. But there could be drugs, alcohol, adrenaline -- Who knows? And even after 100 seconds, even though their physical spirit is gone, they're not compliant. They're still gonna put up a fight. They're not going to cooperate with your verbal commands or your request for deescalation. They're not playing that game. commands or your request for deescalation. They're not playing that game. They still want to hurt you. So, then we might need a little more force -- a joint lock, a neck restraint, something to get them to comply. Alright? Yes. And transitioning to mount is how we're going to do that. So, if Ryron is down, I'm in side mount. I've depleted him. Let's assume that time has passed, and now we want to make that transition into mount. Okay? We're gonna talk about it then we'll break it down. So, we're here. Boom, boom, boom. Control is tight. One, two, three. And we're mounted. Boom. Boom. And now we're here. And he might, he might go wild again when I mount, And he might, he might go wild again when I mount, but I have my hooks, I have my hip pressure. He's certainly gonna be less wild than he was when I first side mounted, because he has so little energy left. Okay? So, some basic concepts here. We're basically gonna slide our knee right across their belly, and we're gonna mount. Again, the most important factor is that you don't do this the minute you land. If you try to mount right away, they're so explosive that you're more likely to get rolled. That's why waiting 100 seconds, potentially, is in your favor, because they have less energy to contest your advancement to the mount when it happens. So, back to the same configuration cross face underhook. So, back to the same configuration cross face underhook. Let's assume that we get our white base, we roll prevented for a long time, and it's time to actually mount. When it's time, we're gonna load up our knees. Okay? We're gonna go to our knees. We're gonna turn the person's face away. We're gonna post our front hand out for base. We're gonna adjust our knees a little bit. And we're gonna slide our knee. Lift that leg up, Ryron. Yeah. Just stay normal. We're gonna take that back leg and we're gonna slide it right across their belly, and we're gonna mount. Straight across. Okay? So, once again, I'm here. My legs might have been wide. When it comes time to mount. My legs might have been wide. When it comes time to mount. I need to load the knees right against the person's body. And the way I think about that is one knee near the head and one near the hip. So, I'm really, like, getting my knees close, because they're getting ready to prepare for the mount transition. But I'm gonna load them up, and I'm not gonna mount right away. It's almost like every time I change my body position, I want to assess how the opponent interprets that change, and how they're gonna respond to it. Because if Ryron's gonna bridge and buck, I want him to do it now, so that I can put my legs back out. So, I load the knees up and I let him -- I wait; I watch. It's always like advance, watch. Advance, watch. Okay? So, in this case we're going from right It's always like advance, watch. Advance, watch. Okay? So, in this case we're going from right here, the next thing I wanna do is because I know I have less base on the inside, I want to make Ryron face this way. My shoulder can help do that. So, the more I do this -- Bridge towards me, that way. It's awkward. If Ryron's gonna bridge up this way -- Go ahead. Look. He wants to look this way. So, by making his face look that way, I'm killing his ability to bridge towards me, because I no longer have big base points over here. So, we're here. Look. Make him look that way. So, a little shoulder love. You can let go of your hands. Your other hand, we're gonna put it out for base. We need base on the front side, because Your other hand, we're gonna put it out for base. We need base on the front side, because our weight will transfer this way, and if I stay locked, I might get rolled in the process. Okay? So, from here, shoulder turn, hand out for base on the front side. And then it's time I adjust my back leg, slightly. I'll show you that in a second. I just take my south knee and I'm gonna slide it right across his belt. Fast. Across, shoot it down, and put my hook in. So, from here, it's like one, two -- my hips come with it -- and I go right to the mount. Okay? So, I'm not doing this. I'm not stepping my foot over. Okay? So, I'm not doing this. I'm not stepping my foot over. I'm opening my pelvis too much when I do that. Instead, my hand goes up, I lean forward, my head is forward, my hand is forward -- sometimes my head even touches the ground, but it doesn't have to. My weight's on my forearm. My knee slides right across. And when it lands, I don't lead with the foot. I do my knee -- I pressure my knee and then I go right into full mount. So, it's like my shin grinds against his thigh to get down in that direction. So, I'm extending my femur down south. So, I'm here. With my -- I extend my hip, and my femur pushes, my shin slides, and then suddenly my leg So, I'm here. With my -- I extend my hip, and my femur pushes, my shin slides, and then suddenly my leg comes out, and it goes around, and I land my hips -- And of course, we want to land with hip pressure, because I can almost certainly anticipate he's going to go, and we're gonna need some nice dynamic hooks once we land right there. Okay? So, once again, we're in control, we're in our wide base, we've prevented the roll. Okay. Our structure in our base was solid. When it's time to mount, we're gonna load up our knees. Boom. And this could be from wherever. He could be here. Put me in the guard. Could have been like -- boom. We waited right here, and now he's tired. Great. I load up right here, boom. We waited right here, and now he's tired. Great. I load up right here, come in, and get right into my kneeling position. Small detail: if this elbow of mine right here is tucked inside -- let me have it inside -- it's not the same. It's a little bit more annoying for Rener. So, he would like my arm to be on the outside. If it is inside, it will still work. Yeah. He's still gonna go. He's gonna drive my face, put the hand out, lean his weight and jump to the mount. But anything you can do. If you can -- Rotate this way. Like he said, when you grab my tricep when you sit through. He's holding my tricep right now. When he goes to his knees, he kind of holds my arm up. When he goes to his knees, he kind of holds my arm up. I load it up. Yeah. Look. He places his knee underneath my tricep. And now I load up. So, we like that. And then we turn the face right here. So, having my hip under his arm just makes it to where his elbow can't be used to push me. Ultimately, if this elbow has a pushing surface inside of my hips, he can use that to annoy me, potentially roll me off balance, just kind of keeping me away from him. I want to be tight. Okay. I want to be wide when its roll prevention. But when it's time to mount, I want to be like this. And I want his appendages to not have inside positioning on me. I want to be like this. And I want his appendages to not have inside positioning on me. And that's what we're doing when we're killing this arm. Ryron showed one way to kill it, is to scoop it up. Another way to kill it is if it's kind of wedged right there, is I'll just bring my knee inside. Boom. So, I might be in this nice sprawl, like roll prevention position. Watch my knee. I'll slide it south, put on his ribs, slide it north and then load Ryron up. My elbow goes right inside my thigh, nice and tight. If you can't do this, it's okay. You still mount even though it's tucked in. There you go. Okay? So, from now I'm gonna start turning his chin away, pressuring his jaw. In practice, you guys, let's go kind of easy. Literally, as long as Ryron's face is not vertical, go kind of easy. Literally, as long as Ryron's face is not vertical, it's slightly facing this way, it's good. I don't gotta put all my weight on it. It's really quite annoying in practice. Okay. But I'm putting that pressure. Once I start putting jaw pressure, it's kind of time to let go. Because this jaw pressure is so annoying that if I keep my hands locked right now, and the jaw, he might bridge and roll in the direction. And my hand is too tight. It gets stuck. So, this connects to this. It's like they're kind of the same timing here. Hand is out. I'm not so wide that his arm can slip out. Okay? So, I'm pretty aware with the structure and the elbow control here. Sometimes my forearm will go to the ground. Sometimes my forearm might leave the ground for base. But the point is I'm always aware of Ryron's Sometimes my forearm might leave the ground for base. But the point is I'm always aware of Ryron's humerus bone and the range of entry that his elbow might have. Pressure, pressure. Now, in terms of the backside, look at how I'm here, I'm here, and look at this. When it's time to mount, I can't mount -- it's too far away. So, right when it's time to go, sometimes I need to bring this back leg in a little bit closer and lean my weight way forward so that now this feels more natural for me to slide over and go into full mount. So, some adjustments will be necessary on this leg even, as I'm driving, I'm going to, kind of like, purposely bringing it in. even, as I'm driving, I'm going to, kind of like, purposely bringing it in. I'm leaning way over the top. Look. And now when I feel safe, I take that back leg -- which was here -- I'm just gonna slice it right across his knee and go right to full mount. I do not want to hang out -- I do not want to hang out here. Ever. Because if he bumps into me -- One huge bump -- boom -- you're gonna get launched. Well, not really because you're turning my face, because you're leaning your weight, your whole energy, your hand is out -- it's unlikely. That's true. But if somebody is 100 pounds heavier, and they're going your hand is out -- it's unlikely. That's true. But if somebody is 100 pounds heavier, and they're going crazy, that's where you are off balance. Good point. By us making all of his body favor the other direction, their roll in the back direction is going to be limited. But the point is, if the knee is on the hip, it's on a launching platform. And you don't want to stay on a launching platform for any extended period of time when you're base elements are that squeezed. Right? Yes. If you're gonna be on his belly, you better have all kinds of base, which we're gonna talk about in our bonus slice. There is no need to pause on the belly. Just go and finish the move. go all the way to the mount. So, is no need to pause on the belly. Just go and finish the move. go all the way to the mount. So, Ryron is here. After some roll prevention, all that is good. When he's ready, he'll bring his knee inside. He'll load up that arm -- it's trapped. Look at my elbow. He killed -- And my hands are completely behind him. Look at how beautiful. When he's ready, a little shoulder love, a little hand out -- boom. Pressure on the shoulder. Hand is out. My arm is trapped. My legs are posted on the ground. Ryron starts to slide and adjust. Quick knee slice, and he goes to the full mount. Okay? One more time. And again, look how he leads with the knee. After it crosses the river, hips or knees close. As his knee comes, he just kind of shoots his knee over and south, and then his foot just kind of dangles over and gets in by itself. his foot just kind of dangles over and gets in by itself. Let's go back. Sometimes -- bonus detail -- sometimes the person in my position, because of the shoulder pressure, their leg hits the ground. So, in that case, Ryron can't get his foot under my leg to hook. So, before he commits his foot, his knee goes to the ground. His elbow's on the ground. And now, watch with his knee -- He's gonna keep his foot -- Look at his foot over here. Foot stays hidden right here, so he can't catch it inside his two legs. Catch it there and go back. So, the foot stays hidden and my arm is out. My knee pushes his legs south, and now I roll my hips. And I do that by My knee pushes his legs south, and now I roll my hips. And I do that by lifting my other knee up off the ground and letting my hips fall here. Rotate -- the back side. So, right there. So, the knee goes down. Watch. Stretch first. I slide the knee south. Boom. Throw my hips. Look at his hips. Do it a couple of times, that hip. Hips. Watch how his hips turning fully. And that's a function of this knee leaving the ground. This is very rare, you guys, because this presumes that that person is gonna flatten their leg and try to impede your landing. Stretch. Turn and slap. And then slide the knee their leg and try to impede your landing. Stretch. Turn and slap. And then slide the knee in my armpit high. Look how his knee shoots up. Look. Knee in the armpit puts my foot near his thigh. And then I know the moment he lifts up his flat leg, I insert my hooks. So, we call it the front side stretch. Okay. When the person's leg is flat, your knee -- your arm is here -- your knee is here. Your knee does this. And then you turn and slap your foot down. So, I'm here. I put my knee down. I do the stretch. And then I push off my back toes. Stretch. Push off this toes, and I do this. Your whole pelvis turns, and your foot finds the ground past their leg. Your whole pelvis turns, and your foot finds the ground past their leg. And then you shoot that knee up, toes by the hip, knees down. When their foot comes up, you throw your hooks in, and you're good to go right there. That's very great detail. You only need that against people who know enough to keep their front leg flat on the ground to try to impede the landing of your rapid knee drive across the belly into full mount. Okay? So, very rare that you'll actually need that detail, um, but if you need it, it's there for you. Yeah. The person on the bottom more likely is gonna be bridging. Bridging, bridging. And bumping towards the back side, gonna be bridging. Bridging, bridging. And bumping towards the back side, trying to free themselves. And when they do that, their legs are gonna be up, planted. So, we're here. Boom, Boom. As he goes to his knees -- Shoulder pressure. I'm like -- And when he chills for a second, I'm like, boom. Go. Obviously, I should not go during active bridges, just to be clear. I wouldn't go if he's twisting wildly. But in between bridges, when I feel like I learned his timing a little bit -- Okay. He's exhausted, he's exhausted. He's exhausted. And that's what brings in the velocity play. Right? Because we talked about this -- how Velocity Principle is the principle of changing your Because we talked about this -- how Velocity Principle is the principle of changing your operational speed. Right? Side mount control is very slow. It's like, you keep your legs out and just hold. Very slow. You're doing nothing. You're just laying on them. They're frustrated. And then suddenly you load up those knees. Get nice and tight. You kind of shelf them right here. You bring that opponent nice and snug. And then you get ready for the pressure. The hand goes out and you're waiting. And in between bridges, you go -- boom. And you mount. And your hips go in. So, you go from very slow to very fast -- To very slow. To very slow, back to the mount. Right? That's Velocity Principle, 100%. And we also during this particular slice are exploring the Pyramid Principle, And we also during this particular slice are exploring the Pyramid Principle, but in different ways than the original slice. The original slice was pyramid on the leg side with those legs really wide, chest heavy, legs out. In this case the pyramid is compromised on the back side. We're shoulder driving their jaw to look the other way. And then we're putting our hand out strategically on the front side, because as we commit that knee across their belly to the full mount transition, our base is momentarily compromised on the front side, unless we put out our base hand and we have a perfect pyramid, and that pyramid on the front side with your hand, coupled with we have a perfect pyramid, and that pyramid on the front side with your hand, coupled with their body, in combination with an effective use of the Velocity Principle is why we're able to mount and have our base only be compromised for a very short amount of time, if at all, because we're getting across that belly so quickly. Back to velocity. The reason why we're using velocity is because we are slightly compromised. There you go. So, we need to move quickly through that red zone, you could say. Green zone is sprawled out wide base side mount. And then when you go to your knees, you're still in the green zone. You're still ready to sprawl out when you need to. you're still in the green zone. You're still ready to sprawl out when you need to. But that quick knee across the belly is -- if there is a red zone, it will be right there. Boom. And then once you land in the mount, you put your hooks in, and your back in the green zone again. So, Velocity Principle, as you're noticing, comes in in one of two reasons, usually. Usually, it's either to speed through a red zone, a danger zone, where you've got to take action quickly, or it's to catch your opponent off guard and seize something that they're giving to you, and you don't want to miss the gift. It's like, take it while it's there. So, that's typically when you're gonna see these rapid velocity plays, is when you want to create something that you want to avoid rapid velocity plays, is when you want to create something that you want to avoid that red zone, or you want to catch your opponent off guard and you know that the gift or opportunity present won't be there forever, o you gotta seize it while it's there. Alright? Excellent, you guys. We're doing mount transition from side mount after depleting them for a number of seconds. 10 seconds. In practice 10 equals 100. So, 10 seconds of control. Maybe some roll prevention. The point is, at some point you hear this, and then you're thinking it might be time. Maybe you wait a little longer even after you hear that. But then finally you go, alright, I'm gonna mount, because I want to free my hands up and be able to But then finally you go, alright, I'm gonna mount, because I want to free my hands up and be able to deal with this person, or address the crowd, or do something else with my hands. Mounting is the right way to do that. Load those knees up. Take your time. And every time you're making a positional change, analyze their response. You want that recon at that point. It's like, okay, what are they gonna do now? They're gonna chill? Alright. Cool. Shoulder drive. Hand out. How are they responding to my shoulder drive? Oh. They're annoyed by it. Okay, cool. That's fine. But are they tripping out? No, they're chilling. Okay? How are their legs positioned? Knees both vertical? Okay. Get ready. Here we go. And now you shoot that knee across. Quick transition into full mount. And you're good to go. And now you shoot that knee across. Quick transition into full mount. And you're good to go. We love it, you guys. Patience, timing, progressive -- right -- gradual movement in the right direction. And get off that belly quickly, and get those hooks in as soon as you can. The same way back mount is an extension of full mount. knee on stomach control is an extension of side mount. knee on stomach control is an extension of side mount. And for our bonus slice in this side mount lesson of exploration we wanted to teach you guys how to use knee on stomach in a basic sense. Also known as knee on belly -- call it what you want -- in a basic sense, to control a subject with your shin across their abdomen, which gives you unique abilities, both in how you manage this person, but also in how you survey the environment, the surroundings, the crowd. So, we're very excited to share this with you guys. And correct me if I'm wrong Rener, but knee on belly used to be part of Gracie guys. And correct me if I'm wrong Rener, but knee on belly used to be part of Gracie Combatives. It was the 24th lesson. It was. Before we filmed. The original. Before it was published to the world. Gracie Combatives. And then we put out the Combatives 1.0 to the world and, um. We didn't include it. It was great. But it was not included. But now it sneaks back in as a bonus slice, where it should be. This is where it should live. It's the right home for it. So, when do you use knee on belly from side mount -- There's two times. It could be if I'm approaching the side mount and I cannot close the distance, or I'm low approaching the side mount and I cannot close the distance, or I'm low controlling somebody -- And my friends are coming. Come on, you guys, get him. And his friends are coming, or he separates me, he pushes me away. So, from in to out, or on my way in, I want to get in closer, I can pause, knee on belly. So, here it is. Check it out. And we're here. So, knee on belly. From the, from top of side mount, I'm gonna go to my knees. Check this out. Hands on the ground. And using my hands, Check this out. Hands on the ground. And using my hands, I pop up, place my knee across the belly, and now my two hands -- floor, floor; neck, neck; thigh, thigh. Hands are moving. But, more importantly, the weight is 70, 80% here -- 20% out here. And as Rener moves, look at my nice outrigger right there. Hands are out. Hands on the shoulders might be a good starting point for you guys. That's how we teach the kids, is here. It's very easy for them. Hands on the shoulders, knee across the belly. Look at my knee position. It's barely past his hip. And my hands are on the ground. Look at my knee position. It's barely past his hip. And my hands are on the ground. Once in a while, the hand might go to the floor. No problem. I touch the ground. As he bridges into me, I want to absorb his bridge. Rotate again. So -- Versus. Almost -- Versus. Almost staying fixed. And then I'm not as dynamic. So, when Rener bridges, I slightly stand on this foot down here. And, in general, when he stops moving, there's a little bit of weight on my toes. But when he moves -- go ahead -- it all shifts to the stomach. Hands, hands, moving, holding. Now, when he pushes my knee or when I decide to Hands, hands, moving, holding. Now, when he pushes my knee or when I decide to drop back to side mount, I underhook his arm. And now using my hands, I shoot my legs out, drop my hips back down, head low, back to standard side mount control. So, here I am again. He's pushing me, potentially. He could be so strong that I -- Maybe I wasn't holding hands. Hold my chest. Push my chest away. He lifts me. I float up. So, that was half Rener lifting me, and it was half me using my hands to pop up. One I float up. So, that was half Rener lifting me, and it was half me using my hands to pop up. One more time. Boom. My knee comes in. My leg is out. My hands are ready. He moves, I move. He bridges, I absorb. He pushes my knee. Freeze. Inside -- Hand down. Both legs shoot back. Back to side mount. Back to the other, um, the other method that I might land knee on belly. We fall down. We fall to the ground. I'm approaching him, and I just go. I place my knee on his belly. And now we move, we move. I want to get the side mount. So, when I see a window, I underhook and I drop down. So, when I see a window, I underhook and I drop down. So, the point is, you don't drop to side mount without the underhook. That's just the bottom line. Yes. Pretty much. I mean, there are some exceptions, but let's just keep it real right now. We want this underhook with the head inside positioning. And then Ryron feels safe to drop down. And now this person calms down. We just controlled side mount for 100 seconds. He's tired. He's done fighting. I go to my knees. From my knees, hands on the ground, knee on belly. And then I'm here, and I'm gone. So, one way to help you disengage from the fight. Greatly. So, one way to help you disengage from the fight. Greatly. And why would we have to disengage from a ground fight? Because we've already won the fight with control. Or multiple attackers. Yeah. You like that one a lot. People ask all the time. What about multiple attackers? It's like, leave the ground fight. But you can't leave a ground fight that you don't understand. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You can't get out of a pool that you don't know how to swim in. Multiple attackers is because they watch too many movies. Okay? Most fights are not multiple attackers. That's a fact. Maybe when you're like in, you know, eighth grade these days, you have two or three kids kicking one Maybe when you're like in, you know, eighth grade these days, you have two or three kids kicking one kid. But -- Even that is the minority of eighth grade fights. Yes. So, it's not multiple attackers. Focus on one person, surviving one person. It's kind of a misnomer, knee on belly, because your knee isn't even on my belly. Kinda. No, it's not. Where's your knee? That's not -- do knee on my belly. For real. Put a knee on my belly. Yeah, keep that right there. Good luck. It's not even that good. So, the point is, it should be called shin on belly. Shin on belly. The problem is shin on belly is a lot harder to say and doesn't have the same marketing value. Okay? So, when it comes to marketing jiu jitsu say and doesn't have the same marketing value. Okay? So, when it comes to marketing jiu jitsu to the world, shin on belly doesn't work. Knee on belly sounds cooler. The problem is, it actually is shin on belly. The reason I'm telling you this is because if you literally do knee on my belly button, you're not gonna have great control. It's not gonna be that good. My hip can slip out to the side too easily. So, Ryron said it. Your shin should be, your knee should be popping out just on the opposite side of their abdomen here is where it should be. Right across my pelvis here. And Ryron can control. The hand position -- just to be clear. One is the neck hug. That's an option. One is a thigh hook. That's an option. One is a hand out. That's an option. One is a hand out. That's an option. So, he doesn't need a hand on this side so much, as his foot is there. In terms of proper foot positioning, a common mistake is they bring it way too close like this. Now, it's kind of off balancing in that direction. So, Ryron wants to have his foot almost arm length away from my shoulder. It's directly -- It's similar, you guys. It's similar to this. It's the same. It's all about that, you guys. It's just the elevated side mount. So, the principles of interest here: Detachment and Reconnaissance. Ok? Detachment. Where's detachment happening? Well, Ryron has to -- When he's side mounted here, and the guy's really strong and he's pushing away, Ryron has to detach from his existing control to Ryron has to detach from his existing control to take advantage of the new control. So, the Detachment Principle is firing here. So, he has to accept that he's not going to be able to hold me down and insert that knee at -- before my knee comes in. Because the alternative -- Go back. The risk is if I push him away and he does not bring his knee in, I could ultimately bring my legs in. So, it's all about whose legs introduce and fill the space. The void -- whose legs fill the void first. And with an effective knee on belly application, Ryron's knee comes in first. And then the other principle is gonna be the Recon Principle. What kind of recon is done in and around knee Recon Principle. What kind of recon is done in and around knee on belly? Well, shoot. Number one, you're going up and down, learning about this person -- right -- how their tendencies, their behaviors, their actions -- Number two. You're also observing the crowd. So, if you're going to get reconnaissance on who's around, knee on belly might be one of the best ways to accomplish that. Because you go here, you can look around and hold me and control my wrist, even. Look. Ryron can talk to anybody he wants right now, but you can't really do that from -- get in low side mount -- from right here. Go. Talk to everybody. Look. My friends are coming. Right. You see what I'm saying? Like, he's in this fight right here, trapped. trapped. I like how you hold my head so tight. So, let me try one. So, we're coming in. Let's practice this, you guys. Both entry methods. We'll go entry from a distance, blocked, knee on belly direct. And then we'll go in, we'll drop into side mount, and then we'll reestablish knee on belly, and then we'll end, disengaging after that second knee on belly acquisition. How does that sound? Cool? So, out, in, down, up, out will be the drill. Um, um, and then when we teach children, I was mentioning, when we do this. We teach them this idea we call coffee table. I tell them like knee here, foot out, hand here. And the reason why, it's cause we call coffee table. I tell them like knee here, foot out, hand here. And the reason why, it's cause the whole hip. It helps them teach -- because the number one mistake people make is they sit so low on their kneeling stomach that this leg loses all of its spring action. It loses its dynamic mobility. Okay? And when it loses that, now that I'm sitting on my actual heel, the problem is, at any point, if Ryron -- I lose it. It's too compressed. A leg that is too compressed is a leg that is not dynamic. So, to keep the spring slightly more open between my glutes and my calf or my ankle, we want to have our hips a little higher. And that between my glutes and my calf or my ankle, we want to have our hips a little higher. And that can be done from a vertical posture here, very nicely, like Ryron was doing. But for kids, it's easier to do this, if they're doing -- Let's rotate all the way. It's easier to teach them this gap in the spring that is here if they have their hands on something -- they can put some weight somewhere else, so it's not all on their quads over here. So, if you're learning this, having the hands on the shoulders and trusting some of the weight here, like 60, 10/20, 20 over here. Like 10 and 10. I'm like on his shoulders a little bit, but it's mostly on his belly. Now move around, Ryron. Then the hands can play, I can move, my foot's moving -- Push me out. I ride with it and I -- We call that spring loaded. I can move, my foot's moving -- Push me out. I ride with it and I -- We call that spring loaded. So, when Ryron turns and extends this arm into me, we teach them, like he said, a little stand up. Big push. Go. It's like, I ride with it, but I come right back. And when he does that, my weight does go to my feet. I stand up. Go again. Look. I'm standing, but I'm not gonna stay here when he goes down. When he goes, he's up bridging -- When he goes down, I'm right there connected back with him. Move in a circle. I'm following, following, holding, holding, surveying the crowd. Look. And then, suddenly, if he pushes my knee, I'll take it. If he doesn't push my knee, I'll still take it. I'll take it. If he doesn't push my knee, I'll still take it. Hand on the ground. Under the neck. Sprawl. Drop the hips. Control, control, control. Suddenly, we're here. Maybe I want to jump back up on my own. Maybe he pushes me back up. In either case, hands load, jump up, insert the knee, hands up, controlling, surveying the crowd. We're here, we're here, we're here. And then, ultimately, we can disengage all the way out. Or drop back in if you want. Sometimes the knee placement is taught to like, especially in the jiu jitsu, like, kind of grappling world, like drive the knee in the center of the sternum and pull up on the gi pants, and try to like drive the knee in the center of the sternum and pull up on the gi pants, and try to apply this discomfort. Um, it's not -- First of all, if Rener did that to me when we were training jiu jitsu, I would just say, hey, stop. Stop. Don't do that. Don't put your knee -- We're two friends doing this. So, that happens more in the sportive world of jiu jitsu. We're talking right now about controlling somebody in a street fight; about going from side control to knee on belly to standing up. So, this positioning is -- it relies on these anchors. holding the person's -- the gi, So, this positioning is -- it relies on these anchors. holding the person's -- the gi, the collar, the lapel, the gi pants. So, if anybody's practicing with you, and they say, yeah, put the knee in the center of the sternum, that's not going to be the best. They're trying to use the knee on belly more as a submission, than as a control position. We're not interested right now in it as a submission. Um -- And if it is a control, again, it's reliant on the fabric of the jiu jitsu gi. Because that's what creates the sufficient counter pressure that allows this knee and, kind of, the diaphragm to be really kind of annoying to deal with. Um, still escapable, nonetheless, but just annoying. So, here's how it works. I'm coming in. I kind of come in. I place my hands on the shoulders. I place my shin across the belly. I kind of come in. I place my hands on the shoulders. I place my shin across the belly. There's my control. And for solo practice on this one, it's quite fun. You're here. You can do this. Look. You leave the knee and you're pivoting, and then spring loaded -- Push up and then push back in and follow. And follow. And now there's the underhook. Underhook hand, sprawl to the elbow. Control, control, control. They start framing and pushing. Hands down, go to your knees, jump up, insert the knee, hands out. Dynamic, dynamic. Boom, boom, boom. Beautiful. Wanna get break dancy with it. dynamic. Boom, boom, boom. Beautiful. Wanna get break dancy with it. We can get down. Alright, you guys. Knee on belly control. Very fun. Very dynamic. Very great way to observe a crowd. A great way to control someone without being too -- You're committed, but you're not attached. This one can be 15 seconds. So, knee on belly. Not 100? And then drop to side mount. Not a hundred? Why not? Cuz it sucks. There's a lot of pressure. And listen. And it's new. If it's new, it can be a little much. And if there's a great weight disparity between training partners here -- he weighs 250, I weigh 120 -- please. 250, please. Okay? Please. Go do it on a pillow, 250. Yeah. And listen. If you just want to learn basic positioning. Lay back down, If you just want to learn basic positioning. Lay back down, please. It's incorrect, but you can do it. Which is just like, okay, we'd be right here. Okay, we'd be here. Look at this, knee down. Just to learn like where placement might be. But this is not how you would ever use it in a street fight, because if he bumps right now, I'm off balance. But if you ever want to do -- I call this shallow knee on belly. Right? Where the other knee is not down. Versus regular. So, this idea of shallow knee on belly, where the knee's down -- and you have no base, but it just -- you can at least for reference, kind of, show where it might be. Be here. Move in a circle a little bit. Just kind of like play here. Like -- I would never do this in application. It's just if someone's 100 pounds heavier, Like -- I would never do this in application. It's just if someone's 100 pounds heavier, and you don't want to kill the bottom person, I would say don't post up that outside leg. So, find a pillow or something to do it on instead of your half sized training partner, because we don't want to hurt them. We need them. We need to protect each other. Have fun. Knee on belly. Let's go. Yeah. 10, 15 seconds of dynamic control, then you drop down to side control. And then understanding that if they're pushing you, or you lose your control, or you simply want to observe the crowd -- Your detachment from side mount to knee on belly doesn't have to be a function of their escape. It could be a function of your reconnaissance escape. It could be a function of your reconnaissance aspirations. Am I right? You stood up. You're observing. When you make sure everything's good to go. Everyone's under control. I'm going back in. We dive back in. Side control, transition to mount, and we're good to go. Have fun, you guys. Let's make this Reflex Development drill a 100 second exercise. For real? 50 seconds of side mount control, and 50 seconds of mount control. seconds of side mount control, and 50 seconds of mount control. Set a timer. Make it, make it for 120 to get you a little time to get set up. But all side mount control -- 50 seconds. Interesting. And then halfway through, go to the mount and hold for 50 more seconds. There you go. It's gonna suck to be you on the bottom. Or when you're on the bottom, you're gonna walk off the mat -- You're gonna finish that drill and you're gonna say, wow, I really, really appreciate all the control tactics that I've been learning. You gonna say, wow, I really, really appreciate all the control tactics that I've been learning. You believe more than ever because it worked on you. Okay? So, as the bottom person, what's your goal from bottom of side mount? Check the rolls, check the guards, start pushing on hips, check the frame, start framing necks. So, basically, anywhere you can get your hands in to annoy, you can do. You want to be creative bench press your opponent, let them go knee on belly for a little bit, and then drop back into side mount. The point is for every indicator from the bottom, there's a different control mechanisms. But for the top person, ultimately, it's all about pyramid, balance, pressure -- Right. And following. Following. Changing that pyramid. And then pyramid, balance, pressure -- Right. And following. Following. Changing that pyramid. And then depletion mindset. Stay close, stay connected. Bottom person, go to work. Once you're -- Top person after 50 seconds, start climbing those knees in and get ready to go full mount. Once you make that transition to full mount, bottom person, give us some new life. But then you can check their anchor and base, you can check their low swims, their high swims. You can even roll to your knees, maybe, if you want to get fancy, because mount control is extended by back mount transitions. Take the back, and then remount back to mount. You can do the half nelson, roll preventions. It's gonna be great, you guys. So, bottom person, roll preventions. It's gonna be great, you guys. So, bottom person, give us some life right now. Give us 50 seconds of side mount life, 50 seconds of mount escape life, and then take a break for a minute, and then switch roles. Let the other person get their, that their top 100 seconds, and you're gonna give yours up for them, just the way they did for you. Okay. One for one on this one. Let's have some fun. 100 seconds. Really start to appreciate what 100 seconds means in a real fight, to be on the bottom of that against someone who has an idea of what they're doing on top. Positional control, side mount. Control. Roll prevention, which is gonna be the best majority Positional control, side mount. Control. Roll prevention, which is gonna be the best majority of it. You might need your modified side mount. If they frame your neck, you modify. If they hug your neck, you come right back up to standard side mount control. After a little while we're gonna transition into mount. Once we mount -- get low -- Obviously, standard neck hug, hooks in. We're gonna go for the Americana though, neck hug variation. We're gonna catch it, but after the tap, we're gonna do a cooperative roll to guard. And in the guard we're gonna do punch block series -- 1, 2, 4, 1. 1, 2, 4, 1, back to stage 1. Once we get back in stage 1, elevator sweep, headlock variation. The attacker will come up and get that headlock. sweep, headlock variation. The attacker will come up and get that headlock. We're gonna stretch out their base point, sweep them over, end up in the mount. Once we mount, the bottom person is gonna push up, providing the arm bar, standard variation. Nice control, negotiation to finish. Cool? So, Ryron's down. I'll start on the side mount here. Ryron will check my rolls. We're here in base. One. Controlling. Low hips. Find the base right here. If the frame comes in, I roll off the top. I'm right here, staying low. His hand comes back around, and I go here. 100 seconds have passed. I'm here. He's exhausted. Hand goes up. Shoulder turn. His legs come up. He's exhausted. Hand goes up. Shoulder turn. His legs come up. I go right to full mount. My hooks go in. Right away, I'm here. Nice little hooks -- always hooks when you mount. And then pin the wrist. He's gonna bend it. We're gonna go for our false feed. He's gonna fight out a little. It's not gonna work. We're gonna slide into our two on one, come up, remove those thumbful grips, and then loop the hand around, head low, check my hooks. One check. Switch. Always switching back to your default hooks before the pressure. Slide two, lift one. Cooperative roll off. Boom. We roll. I swim right inside. I'm already looking for the head. Where is he going from here, guys? Always check those swims on stage 1. We love that. He's punching, he's punching. There's the 2. We love that. He's punching, he's punching. There's the 2. Look. Boom. Boom. He pulls away to a 4. He punches. I let him right back in. We're here. What's he gonna do next? Headlock. Watch his hand sneak in, wrap the neck, posting the opposite leg. From here, what do I do? I feel that opportunity because his leg is up. Hip out, hook in, underhook if it's there. Headlock if it's not. Stretch out the base points. Go right to full mount, using that hook to tag along. Once I mount here, he's gonna push my chest up. I'm gonna ride up, hands on the chest, invert. Let those hips come in low and tight. Swing those hips, you guys. Don't step the foot. Swing those hips, you guys. Don't step the foot. Swing the hips. Control the wrist, two on one, heels tight, knees tight. Check me a little. He's always gonna check. Because I don't want a broken arm; I want a negotiable arm. I don't wanna break it. I wanna negotiate. I want peaceful resolution. Are we good? I want peace, too. Are you sure? Yes. All that attitude, I don't know if I can believe you now. Yeah, I really do. Now you seem to be cooperating because your arm is tied up. Yeah, that's how things work. Got it. Awesome. Okay, you guys, you know the rules. First one scripted. Ryron's scripted. Second one for each of us, a little more. First one scripted. Ryron's scripted. Second one for each of us, a little more. Turn it on a little bit higher. Right? In terms of the resistance, in terms of the intensity for the bad guy. Still channel on the script. 3rd, 4th, 5th 6th, 7th and 8th repetitions, all variations are allowed. Once you do your homework, you get to go play in the yard. You get to modify the script, and have fun with it. So, you're allowed to change the variations of each technique once you get your homework done. Have fun, you guys. 100 seconds. We love this concept. Yeah, the fight can be won right here, you guys. We love this concept. Yeah, the fight can be won right here, you guys. This is it. You land on top of side mount, the fight is over. You know what's so interesting is how much can be lost by advancing from side mount to mount, prematurely. Think about what can go wrong. Because, if in side mount, it's true that you're perpendicular. You have the strongest pyramid -- it's the definition of Pyramid Principle. Strongest depletion capabilities -- right -- you're just burning their spirit. If that's true, and staying in side mount for extended period of time would deplete their If that's true, and staying in side mount for extended period of time would deplete their soul, imagine if you land in side mount and you try to mount in the first seven seconds. Which is very common. Which is way too common. And in their first seven seconds they're fully energized. They buck, they twist, they roll and their violent escape attempt -- their violent intense energy -- is, coincides with your mount attempt, where your base is most compromised. Think about what we stand to lose if we try to make that level of an advancement that soon in Think about what we stand to lose if we try to make that level of an advancement that soon in the interaction. And that type of advancement usually happens because we tell ourselves a story that the goal is to submit the person that you're fighting. And most submissions that you know, especially in the early phases of this course, And even in jiu jitsu, are from the mount, let's say. So, you want to get to the mount to submit with -- could be an arm bar, could be with strikes. And also the mount is considered the more dominant position. True. So, because you want to defeat your opponent, you want to advance the most dominant position to do strikes or a submission. you want to advance the most dominant position to do strikes or a submission. But -- In doing so -- You forget that the goal in a fight is not to defeat your opponent. The goal in a fight is to keep yourself safe. The goal in a fight is to control your opponent. And those things can be done very well from the side control. And like my grandfather always said, his opponents didn't defeat -- He never defeated his opponents. His opponents defeated themselves. So, don't rob them of the opportunity to defeat themselves. 100 seconds. Go to work. 100 seconds. Go to work. If you find yourself in an altercation and the opponent brandishes a weapon, get out and get to safety as quickly as possible. If escape is not an option, or they only brandish the weapon once the fight is underway, and your exit would put others in harm's way, then focus on pinning the weapon bearing arm to the ground while dismounting to the opposite side. This simple cross control position will allow you to maintain control of the weapon while maintaining your balance at the same time. You'll learn a lot more about this technique, at the same time. You'll learn a lot more about this technique, including what to do if you end up underneath a weapon bearing opponent, in the Master Cycle.